Fix typos in Stored and View Schema doc (#11490)
microsoft/FluidFramework: packages/dds/tree/src/schema-stored/Stored and View Schema.md

    Change application could (someday) adjust behavior based on the schema (ex: provide set semantics to a sequence) or have schema specific edits but the initial version will just detect violations and mark them as conflicted.

### Ways to update existing schema:

-   Could support op that changes a schema in a way where all data that was accepted by the old schema is accepted by the new one (ex: add optional fields (if compatible with extra fields), move required field into extraFields, add a type to a field).
-   Could even do things like apply a change to all nodes with a specific type to enable edits which modify a schema and update data atomically (ex: alter table like from sql). This does not work with partial checkouts well.

## Use as `View Schema`

-   Document load: The application can check that their view schema matches their stored schema and that the root has supported content.

    See `checkCompatibility` in [schema.ts](./schema.ts) for an example of how this could work.
-   Let the app provide handlers/converters to adapt data that does not match the desired view schema (ex: support old formats), and apply them through Schematize.

> ## Schema Migration Design Pattern

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Schema Evolution Design Pattern
```

I think Schema Evolution is a more specific and relevant term here.

Features not needed for minimal strongly typed application use or the JSON and XML domain schema are not included.

## Schema Representation

The MVP should include a simple schema system, usable as an MVP for both `stored schema` and `view schema`.

One possible such schema system is included in [schema.ts](./schema.ts).

These `TreeSchema` and `FieldSchema` can be added as `stored schema` as part of an edit op,
which is considered conflicted if it tries to add a type that has a conflicting `name` and is not equal to the existing one. TODO: This was confusing to me. This might be a bit more clear as part of the "Use as `Stored Schema` section.

While a schema must be added to the document as a stored schema to use the type TODO: Which type? I.e. does this mean the same thing as 'a schema must be added to the document as a stored schema in order to be applied to a specific type of node'?
(otherwise adding a new type could break existing data which might not even be downloaded on the current client),
it's possible to add a schema that is compatible with all possible data (assuming the children themselves are compatible with their own types).

> 

Reviewer: I think adding this line break is confusing because in the sentence below it the use of "this" is referring to what's described in the above sentence, and not this section as a whole.

```suggestion
```

## Use as `Stored Schema`

-   Writers: When inserting new content and updating modified nodes, shared-tree can check them against the schema in the document.

    If you insert something into a document that does not currently have schema for the types you are using, you also have to include the schema as part of the edit.

    For example, if you add support for tables to whiteboards, old documents will not have this schema, so part of inserting a table will require updating the schema to allow them (if the document is explicit about which item types are allowed), as well as adding the table schema itself.
-   Change application: changes can conflict if they violate the schema (or maybe only check at the end of a transaction? Or at special marked places and at end?).

    Change application could (someday) adjust behavior based on the schema (ex: provide set semantics to a sequence) or have schema specific edits but the initial version will just detect violations and mark them as conflicted.

> ### Ways to update existing schema:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

### Ways to update existing schema:
```

-   Inline in whatever place is referring to it (see list below)
-   As stored data

> -   Hard coded into shared-tree TODO: SharedTree? (constraints like the tree being a tree not a DAG fall into this)

Author: ```suggestion
-   Hard coded into SharedTree (constraints like the tree being a tree not a DAG fall into this)
```
Is this correct? I'm not sure if we're trying to refer to the actual DDS or the package.

Reviewer: this is really trying to cover schema as source code for all the cases not covered in the below bullet point.
Since this is about theoretical places and architectures and not our concreate implementation, I'm temptyed to avoid real class names (ex: SharedTreeCore or SharedTree) here.

Maybe this would be better:
```suggestion
-   Hard coded into the shared-tree DDS (constraints like the tree being a tree instead of a DAG fall into this)
```

-   Declaratively on nodes of a specific type: Nodes in the tree are typed, so similar to the above, the tree can be configured to apply specific schema based on type of the nodes.

    This forces all nodes of the same type to have the same schema: it's not contextual but easily handles open polymorphism (ex: a child that's allowed to be anything as long as it's in schema for its type).
-   In other schema: For example, a schema can apply specific schema to its children.

    This allows for `contextual schema` (under one parent the same type might have different rules compared to under another parent).

Note that it's possible to refer to schema in a way that's unambiguous, but code handling the data might not always have the schema.
For example, document could refer to a schema by its hash, or name in an append only namespace.
This can have interesting implications for updates to new schema (ex: one client adds data using a schema shipped as code that another client does not have).
Some of the options do not have this issue (inline, central repository (assuming you are ok going down if it goes down and schema are not cached), and in stored data).

# Options to Support

> That's a lot of options and I think there are good reasons for all of them. Long term, we likely want all of them implemented to some extent but I think we can pick a good subset for now and allow extension in the future.

Reviewer: This section should be adjusted to avoid the first person. This document is no longer a design proposal and using first person in it no longer makes sense (if it ever did).

```suggestion
That's a lot of options all of which have use-cases. Long term, at least basic support for all of them may make sense but a much smaller subset can be supported initially while supporting most use-cases pretty well.
```

> I think we want to at least:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Requirements for this initial version should include:
```

-   Make adoption of different constraint/schema systems optional and incremental: all of these different options should be opt in, and easy to add to and existing application if desired.
-   Provide a schema-on-read system (ex: schematize) that can give an application a nice interface to the data, including validation and error handling.

> 

Reviewer: This blank like breaks the formatting, right? This sentence is supposed to be part of the above bullet point.

Author: It does not, at least on my VSCode markdown preview. If it's indented properly, it keeps it under the same bullet but in a new paragraph.

    Anytime the view schema and stored schema are different, this can allow the app to function as well as possible (detect and handle out of schema data, both on read and on edit, as localized as permitted by the provided error handlers).
-   Provide at least one way to customize the stored schema (schema-on-write), which can at least do type based constraints.
-   Have at least one good design pattern that apps can use to handle schema migrations for each method they use to enforce/specify schema (make sure this supports a roll out process where clients have mixed code versions and old documents will be supportable forever).

# Expected Usage Patterns

I suspect most data will be handled in one of the two following approaches:

-   pure schema-on-read: no customization of stored schema
-   almost pure schema-on-write: only using schema-on-read to assist with schema migration so their view schema doesn't have to deal with old formats (which unavoidably pile up in the stored schema).

> 

Reviewer: this also breaks the formatting right?

For example, the core parts of a document might take a schema-on-write approach but allow extensible metadata that is handled with schema-on-read. This is a great place for different applications using the same document to store their data if they want to be less formal about versioning, and do best effort interop with each other's metadata.

# Example/Proposed Design

This design shows an easy to implement MVP, and is not intended to have document or API compatibility with what we do longer term.

It minimally implements the requirements from [Options to Support](#options-to-support) while being extensible in the future.
It can be subsetted for use in earlier milestones, and could be extended for later ones, see [Schedule](#schedule).

This design is intentionally minimal while still being useful.
Features not needed for minimal strongly typed application use or the JSON and XML domain schema are not included.

## Schema Representation

The MVP should include a simple schema system, usable as an MVP for both `stored schema` and `view schema`.

> One possible such schema system is included in [Schema.ts](./Schema.ts).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One possible such schema system is included in [schema.ts](./schema.ts).
```

These `TreeSchema` and `FieldSchema` can be added as `stored schema` as part of an edit op,

> which is considered conflicted if it tries to add a type that has a conflicting `name` and is not equal to the existing one. TODO: This was confusing to me. This might be a bit more clear as part of the "Use as `Stored Schema` section.

Author: Question here

Author: @CraigMacomber any suggestions on this?

Reviewer: Ya, this whole section is pretty horrible. Refactoring most of it into the more specific sections below would probably be better.

> While a schema must be added to the document as a stored schema to use the type TODO: Which type? I.e. does this mean the same thing as 'a schema must be added to the document as a stored schema in order to be applied to a specific type of node'?

Author: Question

Author: @CraigMacomber also this

Reviewer: This is just trying to say:
Nodes have a "type" that refers to a schema. For stored nodes this is a stored schema, and it must exist in the document for the node to be stored.

Probably replace the sentence with something like that.

(otherwise adding a new type could break existing data which might not even be downloaded on the current client),
it's possible to add a schema that is compatible with all possible data (assuming the children themselves are compatible with their own types).

Applications which wish to rely entirely on schema-on-read for some or all of their data can use this pattern for all `stored schema` and only use their actual developer authored schema as `view schema`:

## Use as `Stored Schema`

> TODO: Use what as stored schema? Isn't stored schema just that or can it be used as something else? Or is 'Usages of Stored Schema` a more accurate title?

Author: Question

Reviewer: The "# Example/Proposed Design" (This section in inside that section). This section details one way that specific design could be used as stored schema.

-   Document load: The application can check that their view schema matches their stored schema and that the root has supported content.

>     See `checkCompatibility` in [Schema.ts](./Schema.ts) for an example of how this could work.

Reviewer: this link is wrong now. Also this whole bullet point is probably better covered below talking about view schema.

-   Writers: When inserting new content and updating modified nodes, shared-tree can check them against the schema in the document.

>     If the schema is missing, it must be added as part of the edit: for this, the editing API needs to take in types which can have their desired stored schema queried. TODO: This was a bit confusing for me, do you have an example?

Author: Question

Reviewer: If you insert something into a document that does not currently have schema for the types you are using, you also have to include the schema.

For example, if you add support for tables to whiteboards, old documents will not have this schema, so part of inserting a table will require updating the schema to allow them (it the document is explicit about which item types are allowed), as well as adding the table schema itself.

The portion of this sentence after ":" I think is noting how the editing APIs will need to be able to look up stored schema to do this. I think that's probably better to just remove since it's not clear what level of abstraction the APIs in question are at, and the reader could be thinking on one where schema updates are an implementation detail.

-   Change application: changes can conflict if they violate the schema (or maybe only check at the end of a transaction? Or at special marked places and at end?).

    Change application could (someday) adjust behavior based on the schema (ex: provide set semantics to a sequence) or have schema specific edits but the initial version will just detect violations and mark them as conflicted.

> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

### How to deal with rebasing of schema changes?

Like any other edit, schema changes can be concurrent and need rebasing.
Doing this will need carful design, both to schema violation in documents, but also to provide nice app facing API for handling cases where their schema changes conflicted and thus were apparently undone in an incompatible way.
These cases (where a schema change gets reverted/undone or conflicted) mean that the monotonic approach of schema changes always relax constraints cannot apply everywhere, and thus may be worth reconsidering.

```
